Slide 1.

Good afternoon, I am Bomin Kim from the statistics department of Penn state, and I will introduce my paper with great collaborators, including prof. Bruce Desmarais there, called a network model for dynamic textual communications with application to government email corpora.


Slide 2.

Our new model is called “Interaction-Partitioned Topic Model”, which I will refer to as IPTM. IPTM is a statistical model for time-stamped textual communications, such as emails, cosponsorship of bills, or international sanctions. The model is built upon two well-known models, one is Latent Dirichlet Allocation, a model for topic-based contents where each document can be viewed as a mixture of various topics, and the second one is ERGM, the exponential random graph model, which is a family of statistical models used to analyze networks. So, IPTM is a model about “who communicates with whom about what, and when?”, and we will use LDA to model “what” and use continuous-time version of ERGM to model “who, whom and when”.


Slide 3.

First, I will introduce how the contents or the words are generated. For each topic has unique topic-word distribution phi of k, which means that topic k is characterized by a discrete distribution over the word types. Next, we assign each topic to one interaction pattern, from uniform distribution.

Now, when we create a document, we first sample a topic distribution of each document, for example in this figure, this document has topic distribution as this (highest proportion of topic 1 and topic 2, 3 follows). Then for each word, we first choose the topic from document-topic distribution theta, and then choose a word from topic-word distribution phi given the chosen topic. 

Finally, the content will be summarized as a distribution of interaction patterns, p_c^{(d)}, which is the proportion of words from the topics corresponding to specific interaction pattern. This statistic will be passed and reflected in the tie generating process.


Slide 4. 

Before we move to tie generating process, I would like to briefly mention how we defined our dynamic network statistics. Considering that document sending/receiving behavior is highly influenced by the previous interactions, we track the history of interactions back to 16 days ago, and divide the past 16 days into 3 intervals: now to 1 day ago, 1 day to 3 days ago, and 3 days to 16 days ago, such that they have equal space in log-scale. Then we define the interval-based network statistics, as below.

So, X is the network statistic, and we use three types of network statistics to measure popularity, centrality, reciprocity, and transitivity. We first use outdegree and in degree statistics, how many times i sent a document to anyone or received from anyone; then we use two dyadic statistics, send and receive, which simply means how many times i sent to or received from j. Lastly we use 4 triadic statistics, which are analogous to common 2-star or 2-path statistics in network studies. Details on these statistics are illustrated in Perry and Wolfe, 2012 paper.


Slide 5.

Now this is the key part of our model, the tie generating process. Basic assumption is, in the latent space, everyone is planning to send a document to a single or multiple receivers. 
 






